THE GAME

In Hong Kong Hustle, you are the Tai Pan of the largest international trading house in Hong Kong. It is June 30, 1997, and China is due to take over the Colony on July 1. You have just learned that the Chinese intend to confiscate much of the property of the major trading houses. Your objective is to collect 15 bags of gold and jewels, which you have stored around the city, get them to your boat before midnight, and escape.

You disguise yourself as a factory worker and set out from Repulse Bay, using only public transportation, to visit the locations in your notebook. Here are some hints to help you in your quest to remain the wealthiest trader in Southeast Asia:

At the beginning of the game, your boat is docked near the Macau Jetfoil Pier. You can safely move it once to another pier near Tsuen Wan in the New Territories, but to move it more than once would be very dangerous.
You may encounter members of the Green Triad, Hong Kong's organized-crime faction. For the most part, they are interested only in money, but it is best to avoid them.
You will find the game extremely difficult until you develop a map of the transit routes of Hong Kong. If you have a map the colony, you can navigate more easily. If you don't, you can develop your own by riding the various buses, ferries, and trains from one end of the line to the other.
You will find that most, but not all, of your destinations can be reached by more than one transit line. Generally, travel on the MTR (Mass Transit Railway) and the Canton/Kowloon Railway is faster than travel on buses and trams.
You will probably want to complete all pickups on Hong Kong Island before moving your boat to Tsuen Wan, which is a better base of operations in the New Territories. Pickups in Kowloon can be made equally well from either pier.
Hong Kong Hustle is, perhaps, the most challenging game in this book. Completing the assignment, therefore, is especially rewarding. And as you ride the transit system you can be planning how to spend all that gold—if you succeed. Good joss!

